2013 12th International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications







Using Support Vector Machines to Classify Student Attentiveness for the Development of Personalized 
Learning Systems

Manus Ross, Corey A. Graves, John W. Campbell, Jung H. Kim
Department  of Electrical and Computer Engineering North Carolina A&T State University
Greensboro, NC, USA
E-mail:  rnross@aggies.ncat.edu, cag@ncat.edu,  jwcampbe@ncat.edu, kim@ncat.edu



Abstract—There have been many studies in which researchers have  attempted  to  classify  student  
attentiveness.  Many  of  these approaches  depended  on  a  qualitative  analysis  and  lacked  
any quantitative analysis. Therefore, this work is focused  on bridging the   gap   between   
qualitative   and   quantitative   approaches   to classify    student    attentiveness.   Thus,    
this    research    applies machine     learning     algorithms     (K-means     and     SVM)     
to automatically  classify  students  as  attentive  or  inattentive  using data  from  a  consumer 
 RGB-D  sensor.  Results  of  this  research can  be  used  to  improve  teaching  strategies  for  
instructors  at all levels   and   can   aid   instructors   in   implementing   personalized 
learning  systems,  which  is  a  National  Academy  of  Engineering Grand   Challenge.    This   
research   applies   machine    learning algorithms  to an educational  setting. Data from these 
algorithms can  be  used  by  instructors  to  provide  valuable  feedback  on  the effectiveness   
of  their   instructional   strategies   and   pedagogies. Instructors  can use  this  feedback  to 
 improve  their  instructional strategies;   and   students   will   benefit   by   achieving   
improved learning  and  subject  mastery.  Ultimately,  this  will  result  in  the students'  
increased  ability  to  do  work  in  their  respective  areas. Broadly,  this  work  can  help  
advance  efforts  in  many  areas  of education    and    instruction.    It   is   expected    
that    improving instructional  strategies  and  implementing  personalized  learning will  help 
create  more  competent,  capable,  and prepared  persons available for the future workforce.

Keywords—    Support    vector    machines,    K-meons,    Kinect, personalized learning systems

I.       INTRODUCTION
Many   studies   have   been   performed   to   determine   the attentiveness  of  students  in  an 
 instructional  setting.   Many  of these  studies  relied  on  qualitative     techniques  rather  
than  a quantitative      approach      to      identifying      and      measuring attentiveness   
 [1],    [2],    [3].    Some    researchers    have    also investigated   quantitative   
approaches   to   monitoring   student attentiveness. Biometric  bracelets  are  being  
investigated  as  an
indicator   of   student   attentiveness   [4].   Eye   and   head   pose tracking  have also been 
used to determine student attentiveness [5].   Facial   expressions    have   been   used   to   
infer   student attentiveness  for computer network courses [6].
Classifying   students   as   attentive   or   inattentive   can   be helpful  to  the  instructor  
by  providing   feedback  as  to  which teaching  style  a particular  student  responds  most  
favorably  to. There  are  four  learning  orientations  a  learner  will  likely  fall into:  an  
innovator;  an  implementer;  a  sustainer;  or  a  resistant learner    [7].    If  an  instructor 
 is  able  to  classify  a  student  as attentive   or  inattentive   when   the  student   is  
exposed  to  the associated   teaching    styles   of   each   of   these   orientations, students  
can  be  separated  into  course  sections  that  implement their  optimal  learning  style  or  
can  be assigned  online  teaching modules  that  use  the  teaching  style  a  particular  student 
 will perform optimally with.
Researchers     have     developed     personalized     e-learning systems   based   on  Genetic   
algorithms   (GA)   and  case-based reasoning  (CBR)  [8].  Adaptive  user  interfaces  have  also  
been developed     based    on    personalized     learning     [9].    These approaches   focus  
on  online  learning  settings.   The  proposed system  in  this  research  can  be  applied  to  
online  as  well  as classroom instructional settings.
This   article   describes   a  system  that   uses   a  commercial RGB-D  camera  to monitor,  
count, and record  student  gestures, postures,   facial   expressions,   and   verbalizations   in 
 order   to produce  data  for  determining  student  attentiveness.  Machine learning  algorithms  
are  then used to cluster,  label,  and  classify the  data  for  the  purpose  of  classifying  
subsequent  students  as attentive   or  inattentive.     This  system   is  an   imperative  step 
towards  developing  the proposed  personalized  learning  system described  in this article.

II.      METHODOLOGY


978-0-7695-5144-9/13 $31.00 S  2013 IEEE DOI 10.1109/ICMLA.2013.66
325
IEEE
% computer
society

Authorized  licensed use limited to: University of Ottawa. Downloaded  on December 03,2021 at 
09:51:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.







RGB-O Sensor




Behavior-detecting












Figure  1    illustrates  the  system  proposed  in  this  article. First, an RGB-D sensor is used 
to observe a single student.  An algorithm  that  is  running  in  real time then  detects  and  
counts various  behaviors  that  indicate  attentiveness.  These  data  for this student  are 
stored  into a database.  When  every student  in the  study  has  been  observed,  the  data  from 
 the  database  are clustered  into  two  groups  using  the  K-means  algorithm  [10]. After  the  
data  are  clustered  and  then  labeled  as  attentive  or inattentive, the SVM algorithm [11] is 
used to create a decision boundary for the two groups of data.

A.  RGB-D Sensor
In this  system,  an  RGB-D  sensor  would  be  used  to detect various  student  behaviors.  We  
propose  the  use  of  a  Kinect sensor [12] since it is a relatively  inexpensive  consumer  RGB- 
D sensor with many capabilities  built  into  its official  software development  kit  (SDK).  An  
example  of  a  Kinect  application used  for this  purpose  is shown  in  Figure  2. An algorithm  
that detects,  counts,  and  records  the  number  of  times  a  student raises  his  or  her  hand 
 was developed  using  the  Kinect  sensor and its associated SDK.

B.  Behavior-detecting Algorithm
There are various behaviors that indicate attentiveness ; and many  of  these  can  be  
automatically  observed  and  recorded using  an  RGB-D  camera.  Some  examples  of  these  types  
of behaviors are: leaning forward [13]; speaking to the instructor; hand raising; eyebrow raising / 
lowering [14].

C.  Database
The   data  of  each   student   are   saved   into   the  database separately;  since  each  RGB-D 
 sensor  is  used  for one  student. After  each student  is observed  and  the instructional  
session  is over,  the  data  are  recorded  into  a  new  row  inside  of  the database. The 
number of occurrences of each feature (e.g. hand raising or leaning  forward)  is stored into a 
different  column of that row.

D.  Data Clustering
When  every  student  in  the  study  has  been  observed,  the data   are   clustered   into   two 
  clusters   using   the   K-means algorithm.   The  clusters  of  data  are  labeled   as  
attentive  or inattentive  depending  on  the  distance  from  the  origin  of  the data; the 
cluster  with a centroid  closest to the origin is labeled

inattentive  and  the  other  cluster  is  labeled  attentive.  This  is done  since  all of the 
recorded  data indicate  attentive  behavior and  a  lack  of  these  behaviors  results  in  the  
centroid  of  that cluster being closer to the origin of the dataset.

E.  Classification Algoritm
Since  the  clusters  are  now  labeled,  a  supervised  learning algorithm  can  be  used  to  
create  a  decision  boundary.  In  this work,  we  used  the  support  vector  machine  (SVM)  
algorithm. Six of the data points were used for training and the remaining fourteen were used for 
testing.

III.      EXPERIMENTS

A.  Data Generation
The  data  used  in  this  analysis  were  created  by  randomly generating  data  within  a  fixed 
 range  of  values  (from  zero  to twelve); these values represented the number of times a student 
was observed  exhibiting  a specific  attentiveness  behavior.  For illustration purposes, each 
hypothetical student  was given only two  features  (attentiveness  behavior)  each:  number  of  
hand raises;  and  number  of  times  eyebrows  were  raised.  Figure  3 depicts  the  generated  
data.  Each  of  the  points  in  the  figure represent   a  separate   student.   Twenty   
hypothetical   students were used in this study.

B.  K-means Algorithm
The   K-means   algorithm   was  used   to  cluster   the  data. Algorithm 1 illustrates the basic 
procedure of the algorithm.  In this  research,  the  algorithm  converged  in  four  iterations  
as illustrated in Figure 4.

C.  Support Vector Machine Algorithm
After  the  data  were  clustered  and  labeled  using  the  K- means   algorithm,    they   were   
classified    using   the   SVM algorithm.   Algorithm  2  illustrates  the  basic  algorithm.   
The variable  B represents  the parameters  and /  is chosen  based on the type  of  kernel  
function  used.  In this  research,  a Gaussian Kernel was chosen.



326


Authorized  licensed use limited to: University of Ottawa. Downloaded  on December 03,2021 at 
09:51:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply





Observations of 20 different students (simub1ed)













O              O

The generated data was then clustered  into two groups and labeled as attentive or inattentive. 
These labeled data were then used  as  training  and  testing  data  in  a  supervised   learning
°                             algorithm   (SVM)   to   establish   a   decision   boundary.   This 
decision  boundary  can  then  be  used  to  automatically  classify subsequent  students as 
attentive or inattentive.
In this research we only used two features, but this concept can  be  extended  to  many  
additional  features.  The  data  were limited in this article for illustration purposes.
The  results  from the  system  can  be  used  to  determine  the learning  style  of  a  
particular  student.  An  instructor  can teach similar  material with various teaching  styles and 
 record  which particular student reacts best to a given style. When the optimal

Figure 3: Plot of simulated student behaviors















Figure 4: Result of K-means clustering
teaching  style  is  found  for a specific  student,  that  student  can be placed  in  an  
instructional  setting  that  exclusively  uses  that style.   This   would   provide   the   
student   with   personalized learning  and  could  increase  the  likelihood   of  the  student's 
classroom success.


Algorithm  1  K-means  Algorithm
ltarir1‹irnly  iriitialixc  K cluster  ccnli ‹rids:


‹- ’  :— ini lex  (fi ‹rim 1 tr› K) ‹if i!luster  t!entrr›ii1


uk :—  average (mean) uf points  assigned  to
cluster k

note: m is number of samples

IV.      RESULTS
The  data  were clustered  using  the  K-means  algorithm  and                                      
                                                                         

classified  using  the  SVM  algorithm.  Figure  5  illustrates  the final classification and the 
associated decision boundary for the group of hypothetical students.
From these  results,  students  who  were  not  included  in the initial training or testing set 
can be observed and automatically classified as attentive or inattentive based on the clustering 
and classification of the  students  in a given study.  In a real-world application of this system, 
 more  students would  be considered and  the  researcher  would  need  to  ensure  that  the  
students  are representative  of  the  demographic  of  students  he  or  she  is attempting to 
automatically classify [15].

V.      CONCLUSION
This  research  lays  the  groundwork  for  building  a  system that   can   automatically   
classify   a   student   as   attentive   or inattentive  in an  instructional  setting.  In this  
study,  data were generated that represented  students' number of hand raises and number  of  
eyebrow  raises  during  an  instructional  session.  It was   proposed   that   this   data   
should   be   collected   using   a commercial RGB-D camera such as the Kinect sensor.
Algorithm  2 SVM  Algorithm
Predicted Value
Predict “y=1“  if 6^/        0


Training


•    f is a feature vector which is found  by choosing a kernel function
•    we use a Gaussian  Kerne I for which!-



327


Authorized  licensed  use limited  to: University of Ottawa.  Downloaded  on  December 03,2021 at 
09:51:44  UTC from  IEEE Xplore.   Restrictions apply
















Figure 5: Result of applying SVM to labeled data


ACKNOWLEDGMENT
•      Title III HBGI Program

REFERENCES

V.   Snider,   “Use   of  self-monitoring   of   attention   with   ld   students:         ' 
Research  and  application,”  Learning  Disability Quarterly,  pp.  139-151,  1987.
[2]    E. E. McDowell et al., “A multivariate study of teacher immediacy, teaching effectiveness, 
and student attentiveness at the junior high and senior high levels.,” 1980.
[3]    R. P. Grobe and T. J. Pettibone, “Effect of instructional pace on student attentiveness,” 
The Journal of Educational Research, pp. 131-134, 1975.
[4]    S.     Simon,     “Biosensors     to     monitor     students     attentiveness..” Retrieved 
           June            5,                        2012,                         from 
http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/06/13/,  June 2012.
[5]    S. Asteriadis, P. Tzouveli, K. Karpouzis, and S. Kollias, “Estimation  of

































328

behavioral user state based on eye gaze and head pose-application in an e-learning environment,” 
Multimedia Tools and Applications,  vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 469fi93, 2009.
[6]    H.-R.   Chen,   “Assessment   of   learners'   attention   to   e-learning   by monitoring 
facial expressions  for computer network courses,” Journal of
Educational Computing Research, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 371-385, 2012.
[7]    M.  Martinez,  “What  is  personalized  learning?  are  we  there  yet,”  E- Learning 
Developer's Journal, 2002.
[8]    M.-J.   Huang,    H.-S.    Huang,   and   M.-Y.    Chen,   “Constructing    a personalized  
e-learning  system  based  on  genetic  algorithm  and  case- based  reasoning  approach,”  Expert  
Systems  with  Applications,  vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 551—564, 2007.
[9]    J. Liu, C. K  Wong, and K. K. Hui, “An adaptive user interface based on personalized 
learning,” Intelligent Systems, IEEE, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 52— 57, 2003.
[10]  J.   MacQueen,   “Some   methods   for   classification   and   analysis   of multivariate  
observations,” in Proceedings  of 5th Berkeley  Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and 
Probability., pp. 281—297, University of
California Press., 1967.
[t  j]  C.   Cortes    and   V.   Vapnik,    “Support-vector   networks,”    Machine Learning, vol. 
20, no. 3, pp. 273-297, 1995.
[12]  “Kinect           for           Windows.”           http://www.microsoft.com/en- 
us/kinectforwindows/,  2013.
A.   Guye-Vuilleme,   T.   Capin,   S.   Pandzic,   N.   Thalmann,   and   D. Thalmann, “Nonverbal 
communication  interface for collaborative virtual
environments,” Virtual Reality, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 49—59, 1999.
[14]  H.  Wagner,   C.  MacDonald,   and  A.  Manstead,   “Communication  of individual emotions by 
spontaneous  facial expressions,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology,  vol. 50(4), pp. 737—743, 1986.
[15]  G. Gan, C. Ma, and J. Wu, Data Clustering: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications (ASA-SIAM  
Series on Statistics and Applied Probability). Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 
2007.


Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Ottawa. Downloaded on December 03,2021 at 
09:51:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply.
